What is Preemptive Scheduling?

Preemptive scheduling is used when a process switches from the running state to the ready state or from the waiting state to the ready state. The resources (mainly CPU cycles) are allocated to the process for a limited amount of time and then taken away, and the process is again placed back in the ready queue if that process still has CPU burst time remaining. That process stays in the ready queue till it gets its next chance to execute. 

Algorithms based on preemptive scheduling are Round Robin (RR), Shortest Remaining Time First (SRTF), Priority (preemptive version), etc. 

What is Non-Preemptive Scheduling?

Non-preemptive Scheduling is used when a process terminates, or a process switches from running to the waiting state. In this scheduling, once the resources (CPU cycles) are allocated to a process, the process holds the CPU till it gets terminated or reaches a waiting state. In the case of non-preemptive scheduling does not interrupt a process running CPU in the middle of the execution. Instead, it waits till the process completes its CPU burst time, and then it can allocate the CPU to another process. 

Algorithms based on non-preemptive scheduling are: Shortest Job First (SJF basically non preemptive) and Priority (nonpreemptive version), etc. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key Differences Between Preemptive and Non-Preemptive Scheduling

1: In preemptive scheduling, the CPU is allocated to the processes for a limited time whereas, in Non-preemptive scheduling, the CPU is allocated to the process till it terminates or switches to the waiting state.

2: The executing process in preemptive scheduling is interrupted in the middle of execution when a higher priority one comes whereas, the executing process in non-preemptive scheduling is not interrupted in the middle of execution and waits till its execution.

3: In Preemptive Scheduling, there is the overhead of switching the process from the ready state to the running state, vise-verse, and maintaining the ready queue. Whereas in the case of non-preemptive scheduling has no overhead of switching the process from running state to ready state.

4: Preemptive Scheduling has to maintain the integrity of shared data that’s why it is cost associative which is not the case with Non-preemptive Scheduling.














